kvacidatha tapanoparāgakāle puri nidadhat kṛtavarmakāmasūnū |
yadukulamahilāvṛta: sutīrthaṃ samupagato'si samantapañcakākhyam ||1||
kvacit-atha	once then
tapana-uparāga-kāle	in the solar eclipse time
puri nidadhat	in the city leaving
kṛtavarma-kāmasūnū	Kritavarma and Aniruddha
yadukul-mahilā-āvṛta:	the Yadus and their women folk along with
sutīrthaṃ samupagata:-asi	to the holy spot (Thou) went
samantapañcaka-ākhyam	Samantapanchaka known as
Once then during the time of Solar eclipse, leaving behind Kritvarma and Anirudhdha in charge of Dwaarika, Thou went to the holy spot known as Samantapanchaka, along with the Yaadava clan and their womenfolk.
bahutarajanatāhitāya tatra tvamapi punan vinimajya tīrthatoyam |
dvijagaṇaparimuktavittarāśi: samamilathā: kurupāṇḍavādimitrai: ||2||
bahutara-janatā-hitāya	for the large number of peoples benefit
tatra tvam-api	there Thou also
punan	sanctifying
vinimajya tīrtha-toyam	dipping into the holy waters
dvija-gaṇa-parimukta-	for the Braahmin groups giving away
vitta-rāśi:	money in large quantity
samamilathā:	(Thou) interacted
kuru-pāṇḍava-ādi-mitrai:	with the Kauravas and Pandavas and other friends
Thou also took a dip in the holy waters and thereby sanctified the waters for the benefit of the large number of people. Thou also gave away money in good amount to the group of the Braahmins. Then Thou interacted with Thy friends the Kauravas and the Paandavas and others.
tava khalu dayitājanai: sametā drupadasutā tvayi gāḍhabhaktibhārā |
taduditabhavadāhṛtiprakārai: atimumude samamanyabhāminībhi: ||3||
tava khalu dayitā-janai:	Thy indeed with the wives
sametā	mixing
drupadasutā tvayi	Draupadi in Thee
gāḍha-bhakti-bhārā	deep devotion carrying
tat-udita-	by them said
bhavat-āhṛti-prakārai:	Thy carrying (them) away methods
ati-mumude	was very delighted
samam-anya-bhāminībhi:	with other women
Draupadi who was deeply devoted to Thee, freely mixed with Thy wives. She was very much delighted when they narrated the various methods by which they were abducted and married by Thee. The other women also enjoyed the narrations.
tadanu ca bhagavan nirīkṣya gopānatikutukādupagamya mānayitvā|
cirataravirahāturāṅgarekhā: paśupavadhū: sarasaṃ tvamanvayāsī: ||4||
tadanu ca bhagavan	and after that O Lord!
nirīkṣya gopān-	seeing the gopas
ati-kutukāt-	with great joy
upagamya mānayitvā	approaching and honoring them
ciratara-viraha-ātura-	for very long separation (from Thee) suffering
aṅga-rekhā:	body frailed
paśupa-vadhū:	the gopikas
sarasaṃ tvam-anvayāsī:	joyfully Thee approached
After that O Lord! Seeing the gopas Thou approached and honoured them with great joy. The gopikas had become frail in body due to the sorrow of separation from Thee for a very long time. Thou joyfully went to them also.
sapadi ca bhavadīkṣaṇotsavena pramuṣitamānahṛdāṃ nitambinīnām |
atirasaparimuktakañculīke paricayahṛdyatare kuce nyalaiṣī: ||5||
sapadi ca	and soon
bhavat-īkṣaṇa-utsavena	Thee seeing celebration
pramuṣita-māna-hṛdām	wiped away the complaints from their hearts
nitambinīnām	of the beautiful women
ati-rasa-parimukta-	intense love giving away
kañculīke	their bodices
paricaya-hṛdyatare	in the familiar and very dear
kuce nyalaiṣī:	breasts (Thou) got absorbed
Instantly then, celebrating the joy of Thy sight all complaints from the hearts of the beautiful women were wiped away. With the intense love welled up, their bodices burst open revealing their very dear familiar breasts where Thou got absorbed.
ripujanakalahai: puna: punarme samupagatairiyatī vilambanā'bhūt |
iti kṛtaparirambhaṇetvayi drāk ativivaśā khalu rādhikā nililye ||6||
ripu-jana-kalahai:	enemies in conflict
puna: puna:-	again and again
me samupagatai:-	my, by happening
iyatī vilambanā-	so much delay
abhūt	became
iti kṛta-parirambhaṇe-	thus making embrace
tvayi drāk	by Thee immediately
ativivaśā	very overwhelmed
khalu rādhikā	indeed Raadhika
nililye	became absorbed
Raadhikaa was totally absorbed in Thee when Thou embraced her and told her that so much delay was caused in meeting her and the gopikas because of frequent clashes with the enemies.
apagatavirahavyathāstadā tā rahasi vidhāya dadātha tattvabodham |
paramasukhacidātmako'hamātmetyudayatu va: sphuṭameva cetasīti ||7||
apagata-viraha-vyathā:-	(who were) free of the separation pangs
tadā tā:	then they (the gopikas)
rahasi vidhāya	privately making
dadātha tattva-bodham	gave the knowledge of Reality
parama-sukha-cit-	Supreme Bliss Consciousness
ātmaka:-aham-ātmā-	Brahamana am I, the self
iti-udayatu va:	thus may dawn in you
sphuṭam-eva	very clearly only
cetasi-iti	in your hearts, thus
Then the gopikas were rendered free from the pangs of separation as Thou gave them the knowledge of Supreme self privately. Thou instilled into their hearts that Thou were the Supreme Bliss Consciousness and the Supreme Brahaman, their inner most self.
sukharasaparimiśrito viyoga: kimapi purā'bhavaduddhavopadeśai: |
samabhavadamuta: paraṃ tu tāsāṃ paramasukhaikyamayī bhavadvicintā ||8||
sukha-rasa-parimiśrita:	with joy mixed
viyoga: kim-api	separation somehow
purā-abhavat-	formerly happened
uddhava-upadeśai:	by Uddhava's preachings
samabhavat-amuta:	(but) happened by this
paraṃ tu tāsām	after (this) indeed to them
param-sukha-aikyamayī	Supreme Blissful Union
bhavat-vicintā	(with Thee by) Thy (mere) thought
There remained a feeling of joy mixed with the sorrow of separation when long back the gopikas were advised by Uddhava. But after this instruction by Thee, they indeed were experiencing Supreme Blissful Union with Thee by a mere thought of Thee.
munivaranivahaistavātha pitrā duritaśamāya śubhāni pṛcchyamānai: |
tvayi sati kimidaṃ śubhāntarai: rityuruhasitairapi yājitastadā'sau ||9||
muni-vara-nivahai:-	by the great sages groups
tava-atha pitrā	Thy then father
durita-śamāya	for son's atonement
śubhāni	auspicious rites
pṛcchyamānai:	were being asked
tvayi sati	Thou being there
kim-idam-śubha-antarai:-	what this auspicious rite others
iti-uru-hasitai:-api	thus loudly laughing also
yājita:-tadā-asau	made to perform sacrifices then he (Vasudeva)
Vasudeva asked the assembly of the great sages about the auspicious rites to be performed for the atonement for the sins. Even though the sages were very amused and laughed at such an enquiry, because having Thee as a son there was no need for any atonements. But they made him perform the required rites all the same.
sumahati yajane vitāyamāne pramuditamitrajane sahaiva gopā: |
yadujanamahitāstrimāsamātraṃ bhavadanuṣaṅgarasaṃ pureva bheju : ||10||
sumahati yajane	during the very big sacrifice
vitāyamāne	which was being performed
pramudita-mitra-jane	with the delighted friends
saha-eva gopā:	also along with the gopas
yadu-jana-mahitā:	by the Yaadavas honoured
tri-māsa-mātraṃ	for three months
bhavat-anuṣaṅga-rasaṃ	Thy company's pleasure
purā-eva bheju:	like the olden times enjoyed
The very big sacrifice was performed which lasted for three months. During that time Thy friends and the gopas were honoured by the Yaadavas and they enjoyed Thy company's pleasure like in the olden days.
vyapagamasamaye sametya rādhāṃ dṛḍhamupagūhya nirīkṣya vītakhedām |
pramuditahṛdaya: puraṃ prayāta: pavanapureśvara pāhi māṃ gadebhya: ||11||
vyapagama-samaye	at the departing time
sametya rādhām	approaching Raadhaa
dṛḍham-upagūhya	tightly embracing
nirīkṣya vīta-khedām	seeing (her) free from sorrow
pramudita-hṛdaya:	with a happy heart
puram-prayāta:	Thou went back (to Dwaarika)
pavanapureśvara	O Lord of Guruvaayur!
pāhi māṃ gadebhya:	save me from ailments
At the time of departing Thou approached Raadhaa. As Thou held her in a tight embrace Thou were happy to see her free from all sorrow of separation or otherwise. Thou returned to Dwaarikaa with a happy heart. O Lord of Guruvaayur! Save me from all ailments.